Our competition can be broken down into four distinct categories: No Quality Assessment, Manual Quality Assessment, Telepathology, and Whole Slide Scanning. No Quality Assessment makes up the majority of our market space as most biopsies take place in out-patient settings where a trained cytopathologist is not available to assess the quality of the sample before the patient leaves. In these cases, the clinician will take multiple samples (up to 5) and send them on for diagnostic work up where 20% will result in an inadequate biopsy determination. While this is fast and cheap in the short term, it results in additive clinical and operational costs down the road. Companies such as Milestone have created mobile lab carts to allow the pathologist to come to the procedure and assess the tissue’s quality at the time of its collection. These carts are cumbersome to maneuver across the hospital and the assessment process significantly increases procedure time. Larger hospitals use telepathology tools such as Mikroscan to keep their pathologist in the lab while having a technician at the point-of-care to prepare the sample for remote assessment. While this saves pathologist transit times, remote assessments do not address the challenges of manual assessments, as they require even more time and people to implement. Furthermore, remote assessments are not reimbursable under current coding schema. Whole Slide Scanning platforms such as Philips Intellisite are indirect competition as these technologies are laboratory based and have no quality assessment component meaning that they do not apply to this current market need. We will rely on the aforementioned patents protecting sample preparation, image acquisition, and software as a barrier to entry against potential, future, direct competition. In the long term, our expansive cloud-based dataset of images, diagnoses, and patient information used to train our machine learning models will offer substantial product superiority and will act as an additional preemptive response to direct and indirect competition.

[Competition](../strategy/competition.md){: .md-button }