3.3M fine needle aspiration biopsies (US, 2019) are evaluated annually by 5,500 US hospitals. Pathware expects an average revenue of $200 per procedure and $20k per Bioptic™ unit, representing a $1.4B market opportunity.

In 2020, we will conduct beta trials with Michigan Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, University of Washington, UnityPoint Health, Henry Ford Health Systems, and Mount Sinai Hospital. For our initial accounts in our soft launch, we are providing hospitals with a Bioptic™ unit free of charge along with a free trial of 1,000 sample assessments to clearly demonstrate ROI for the institution. The $100,000 in profits generated for the client during the trial will lower the threshold for adoption and shrink the sales cycle to less than four months. Individual Pathology Department Directors have the ability to make the purchasing decision as an operational expense rather than having to go through the lengthy capital expense process that regularly takes 8-12 months to secure a contract. As we expand and achieve market acceptance, we anticipate this sales cycle to approach two months.

Once beta trials are complete, Rodger Moore, current VP of Sales at Philips Healthcare, will come on full time as our Chief Commercial Officer to pursue accounts at 15 key health institutions with whom we are already in discussions for pilots. Specifically, we are targeting the Directors of the Departments of Pathology in larger academic Cancer Centers to lead internal integration of these initial accounts as they are thought leading institutions who have expressed interest in having pathology assessments performed onsite. In 2021, we will hire four sales associates to our outside sales division to establish accounts with at least 15 Cancer Centers. We will then overlay 10 inside sales representatives to reach the 1,500 CoC Accredited Cancer Centers and 4,000 community hospitals and private practices. These accounts have far fewer decision makers resulting in a significantly shorter sales cycle of two months compared to the 6-8 months seen at larger academic facilities. Through a combination of academic publications, conference exhibitions, introductions from early adopters, and targeted outreach, our sales representatives will connect with the directors of Pathology and Radiology to organize a demonstration of the product. As we scale, these demonstrations will largely be conducted virtually as this is quickly becoming the gold standard with medical inside sales teams today. Virtual communications give hospitals the flexibility to organize the demonstration on their own time while also decreasing cost for the sales organization. We will utilize the common “book-and-bill” model where we provide the unit to the institution for trial purposes with an agreement to begin billing after the second month of usage. Many comparable platforms in radiology operate on this sales principal allowing us to capitalize on an existing streamlined purchasing protocol. Following product adoption, sales reps will manage an ongoing account maintenance program with the goal of ensuring positive net promoter scores. Account maintenance will include 24/7 customer support with call center triage, warranty services to repair and replace damaged units, and updates when new unit functionalities are released.

Outside of the hospital marketspace, we are also pursuing partnerships with private diagnostic laboratories. By 2022, we aim to have established a sales account with Quest Diagnostics, a global leader in diagnostic testing and healthcare information technology, to standardize biopsy collection in smaller institutions and outpatient clinics. We are already engaged in communications with Quest Diagnostics, as they are interested in distributing our technology to serve as their entry point into digital pathology. Quest has strong incentive to adopt digital pathology tech; their largest competitor, Lab Corps, has already formed a partnership with Philips. Additionally, we have meet with the senior executive teams from Philips, NVIDIA, Optum Health, Canon, and Tempus to begin additional collaborative discussions in complementary markets.

Once established in the US markets, we will branch into international markets by integrating into neighboring North American Markets ($509M) and then expanding into European ($3.5B) and Asian ($9.1B) markets where our team has medical device sales, distribution, and regulatory experience. With international expansion, our global market opportunity totals $18.3B, based on the current FNAB volumes (5% CAGR).

[LINKOUT TO GO-TO_MARKET]