The Bioptic™ unit is a standalone tool placed at the point-of-care. The unit is composed of plastic components that will house a specialized digital microscope, mobile slide stage, and image processing components with an interactive touch display. The unit is optimized for cytology sample analysis, a capability not yet achieved by competing whole slide imagers which are limited to histology imaging. The initial cost to produce the Bioptic™ unit is $8,600 which will decrease to less than $5,555 at scale. Our proprietary algorithms identify the quality and quantity of the target tissue collected to verify that the biopsy procedure successfully extracted enough sample to yield a diagnosis.

We have developed a functional alpha prototype that is able to reconstruct images with submicron resolution. These images are then stitched together with to generate a whole slide image. The resulting image is then run through a three-stage, computer vision analytics process to classify cell clusters with greater than 99.2% accuracy based on internal validation testing on biological slides. The identification of clusters with such accuracy is a critical milestone, as sample adequacy is determined by the number and size of cell clusters present within a sample. We have also built out a functional accompanying cloud infrastructure and have successfully pushed whole slide images to our proprietary and secure cloud. This infrastructure will become a data collection hub storing slide images and deidentified patient data to be used in the continuous improvement of the Bioptic™ machine learning (ML) algorithms critical to the adequacy assessment function. A constantly growing dataset of images used to improve our algorithms will boost Bioptic™ superiority over competition. Finally, we are currently engaged with Pensar, a nationally recognized product development firm, to build out Field Test Units (FTUs) that will be used in our clinical validation studies in Q1 2020. The feedback on the FTUs will allow us to iterate on the design and graphical user interface for launch in 2021.

[LINKOUT TO PRODUCT]