# Porter's Five Forces
## Threat of New Entrants
The threat of a new entry in the near term is relatively low due to technical, regulatory, and Intellectual Property barriers in place and the niche nature of the market. However, Pathware Inc. recognizes that it is reasonable to expect competitors to enter the market space once the opportunity is highlighted as they begin generating traction in 2020/2021. The technical challenges of developing a similar unit are not insurmountable by a well-funded engineering team and the regulatory burden is relatively low as a laboratory instrument. They plan to continue expanding their IP portfolio, but there is a significant amount of legal room in the space being that the technique is less than five years old with very few patents on record. That being the case, the goal is to saturate the market with the Bioptic™ as quickly and efficiently as possible as hospitals are reluctant to change unless there is a magnitude of improvement over the current technique that they are using. Furthermore, Pathware Inc. is incorporating additional indications for the use of the platform to cement their position in the hospital while expanding revenue opportunities.

## Threat of Substitution
Overall, the threat of substitution by another technique or platform is remarkably low. The only other options available in today’s marketplace are the manual assessment or no assessment at all. While it is not impossible for an institution to revert to their previous techniques, it is unlikely as hospitals resist rapid changes in protocols. Unless their technology is significantly underperforming on the financial metrics that the hospital is seeking or results in negative patient outcomes, hospitals and physicians will resist changing again until there is a significantly better solution available.

## Bargaining Power of Buyers
In the United States, there are approximately 230,187 physician practices. Of these practices, 50% are single office physicians, 47% have less than 10 physicians, and the remaining 3% support 10 or more physicians. The AHA recognizes 5,500 Accredited Hospitals which all would be potential customers of the Bioptic platform. Of the 5,500 Hospitals, 1,500 are large cancer-oriented hospitals, and 62 are NCI Cancer Centers who process thousands of samples every day. These 5,562 often serve as the pathology services of smaller community hospitals which makes up about 60% of their pathology workload daily. Additionally, there are 1,243 Veterans Affairs hospitals and clinics across the country that would viable customers of the technology. Being that the VA is the largest network of hospitals in the nation and has preferred buyer status due to government regulations, they can exert the highest amount of influence on the sales prices. Pathware team’s extensive experience selling into these accounts enables them to avoid any pitfalls that this position may present. The relatively large number and diversity of hospitals and clinics across the country enable them to avoid burdensome buyer negotiations around price points. The trend towards consolidation of medical practices in the market increases the bargaining power of their clients, but this will have a minimal impact on the business in the near term as the clear majority (97%) of the market has fewer than 10 physicians in the practice. Pathware Inc. can further diversify this risk by incorporating the 20,000 Hospitals recognized by the World Health Organization and the 26,000 US Animal Hospitals all of which are potential customers of the platform.

## Bargaining Power of Suppliers
The components that comprise the Bioptic™ platform are relatively simple in nature and widely accessible in the market from a variety of suppliers. Examples being their LED arrays, boards, digital screens, plastic components, and motors. These points of flexibility allow for greater negotiation power from suppliers as they scale. However, there are two components that are directly dependent upon a single supplier: Sony’s CMOS sensor and Nvidia’s Jetson Module. At the time of writing this business plan, Sony is the only producer of these highly specialized CMOS sensors with pixel sizes small enough for cellular imaging with their microscopy technique. As technology continues to develop, they anticipate this apparent monopoly on the market to open as companies such as Canon continue to make advancements. Nvidia is dominating the computer vision processor market space with very little competition. Pathware Inc. is currently utilizing the second generation TX2 Jetson module for their proof-of-concept testing with plans to upgrade to their third generation AGX Xavier module for market rollout. While they are limited by a single supplier, they can diversify the risk by being able to work with multiple generations of their processors in the unlikely event of price increases down the road. Both companies are well established in the market and unlikely to go out of business giving confidence in a stable supply chain for the foreseeable future.

## Rivalry amongst Existing Competitors
Pathware’s primary competition in the industry today fall into three categories: No Quality Assessment, Manual Quality Assessment, and Tele-pathology Assessment. Much of the market (93-95%) opt for No Quality Assessment and simply take multiple samples from the potentially cancerous lesion to collect an adequate sample. The challenge with this technique is that the samples will grow increasingly clouded with pooling blood, fibrous matter, and extraneous fluid every time that the needle is passed through the tissue. It is this technique that leads to the 1 in 5 chance that the patient will have to return in the future to repeat the procedure. The only other option in the market is to implement a mobile cart station where someone can be on site to prepare and assess the sample before the patient is discharged. In the Manual Quality Assessment process, institutions will have their specialized cytopathologist carry a sizable mobile lab station down to the biopsy suite or operating room. This care will equip them to prepare, stain, and assess the sample to ensure that a quality sample is extracted to mitigate the 1 in 5 chance of failure. Companies such as Milestone SRL create these carts, but most hospitals prefer to create their lab stations in-house as it is more flexible for needs while also being more cost effective. Overall, only 5-7% of the market has integrated this procedure into their workflows due to cost and personnel limitations. Aiming to address the personnel challenges of the manual assessment, some institutions have implemented tools such as Skype Business and Apple’s FaceTime into their microscope carts to allow lower cost technicians onsite to prepare the sample allowing remote consultation from the pathologist. The potential transit time savings for the pathologist are challenging to justify with increased equipment costs, added personnel, and longer procedures which mean only a few very large academic institutions have implemented this technique. At the writing of this business plan, there are no fully automated solutions targeting this issue with biopsy quality available on the market giving Pathware a low-risk competitive landscape and greater negotiating power with their customers.