!!! tip "The Future is FNA"
    At Pathware, we have created a stainless whole slide scanner that is able to image both histology and cytology samples. Being that the histology space is quickly becoming overcrowded with players like Philips and Leica, we have focused our efforts on improving the diagnostic utility of cytology samples where there are currently no competitors on the market. With the Bioptic™, we are able to standardize the FNA procedure regardless of staffing or geography of a hospital system. By enhancing the diagnostic utility of this minimally invasive technique, we are riding a wave of sentiment in the field of medicine: that minimally invasive practice is the future, much in the same way that we are seeing surgeries shift to a greater emphasis on laparoscopic procedures.
    
## Why Fine-needle Aspirated Biopsies?
Fine Needle Aspiration (FNA) is a cytologic methodology of extracting a sample for diagnosis. During this procedure, a clinician will guide an incredibly thin needle (typically 22-gauge) into a mass and apply negative pressure to a syringe to collect a fluidic sample of cells from an area of interest. That sample is then smeared between two glass slides, stained and assessed by a sub-specialized cytopathologist to render a diagnosis. This is a relatively young technique in the clinical workflow that was pioneered in the 1980’s as a minimally invasive biopsy technique when compared to core needle or excisional biopsies. FNA procedures were rapidly adopted across the globe due to the significant decrease in complications, its utility in outpatient settings, and the cost-effective nature of the procedure. However, this technique experienced pushback in the early 2000’s due to issues with non-diagnostic samples that were leading to delayed or even incorrect diagnoses. It was in this time period that a technique of Rapid On-site Evaluation (ROSE) was developed to verify the quality of a biopsy sample at the point of extraction to improve the diagnostic yield. Many studies show that ROSE increases the diagnostic reliability of FNA to match that of Core Needles, but the majority of hospitals could not afford the specialized personnel and equipment to implement this gold standard clinical practice.

Today, the FNA procedure is primarily used to extract samples from risky or highly-sensitive lesions due to its remarkably low rate of complications. Specifically, FNAs are the primary method of thyroid/oral cavity masses (due to nerves and major arteries), pancreas and deep gut lymph nodes (due to risk of bowel puncture and septic shock). The utility of FNAs is still hotly debated; in the case of lung tissue, core needle biopsies have a higher rate of complications such as pneumothorax (i.e. collapsed lung) while FNAs run the risk of not gathering enough sample for diagnosis – subjecting the patient to more procedures and concomitantly delaying the diagnosis. The use of FNAs in tissues such as breast, where the risk of major complication is lower than other areas, are also thoroughly debated. Oftentimes, the surgeon will use an FNA to localize and characterize a lesion to better place the core needle and maximize the quality of the sample collected. Other tissues such as prostate are exclusively biopsied by core needle due to the low risk of major complication and the challenge of missing the diagnosis is greater. Current clinical practice is largely weighted as a balance of risk: although an FNA procedure has little-to-no complications, missing the tissue could lead to a delayed or inaccurate diagnosis. Today, clinicians err on the side of collecting more tissue if possible. This results in about 25% of biopsies being performed as an FNA and the remaining 75% done by core needle.

While there are whole pathology slide scanners available on the market today with software to image and classify cells in a sample, nearly all of these platforms are focused on the histology market. Histology is where a large chunk of tissue is collected (core needle or excisional biopsies), encased in a wax block, and sliced to an exact thickness, and mounted on a glass slide for staining and assessment by a pathologist to render a diagnosis. These scanners and software packages are only applicable to the histology markets due to their inability to handle the variance in the thickness of the sample that is seen when you create a cytology smear – their camera systems are unable to compensate for the extreme variance in z-axial (focal plane) depth and focusing issues render histology image capture processes unreliable for cytology. Some scanners have implemented a technique called z-stacking: a process of taking images at multiple heights to account for this variance, consequently increasing file size and the time needed to scan a slide. In most cases: a full order of magnitude to 10-15 minutes per slide.

We at Pathware firmly believe that the future is FNA, as it represents the most minimally invasive biopsy technique possible. The future diagnostic workflow envisioned by major players in the space (ex: J&J) is to have a patient come into the hospital for a robotically guided biopsy, diagnose the patient onsite, and ablate any tumor immediately so that the patient does not need to return to the hospital multiple times for multiple procedures. This workflow is only possible if you are able to diagnose at the point-of-care which is the value of cytology over histology. Histology requires equipment to encase in wax, section the tissue, mount and stain the sample, and image the sample which makes this near impossible. Frozen sections destroy the tissue for later diagnostic applications and are only used in extreme cases where you need to identify clean margins. Additionally, frozen sections can take hours to perform barring this from a viable application long-term. Cytology is perfectly positioned to collect, prepare, and diagnose a sample at the point-of-care, and we are building the Bioptic™ platform to be the front runner in this automated workflow. Additionally, since the Bioptic™ is a stainless imaging platform, the entire sample remains viable for downstream genomic sequencing for targeted cancer therapy development.

There are other biopsy techniques being developed that have the potential to dramatically improve our ability to detect cancers at earlier stages and intervene before they metastasize. Specifically, I am referring to blood biopsies which have received a significant amount of hype over the past decade as the silver bullet to cancer detection. We believe that this technology has the ability to dramatically improve the quality of care that we are able to provide cancer patients. However, we do believe that the abilities of these tests are significantly overstated compared to what it will likely become over time. In order to achieve the end goal of a coming to a primary diagnosis and starting treatment off of a blood biopsy, you would need to systematically destroy two specialties of medicine (Radiology and Pathology), both of which are profit centers for hospitals. Additionally, you would need to bypass decades of established literature, drug development, and clinical education that are built off of radiology and pathology findings to be able to effectively overhaul the clinical workflow in this way. That being said, I only see two ways that this technique is widely adopted: Cancer Screening and Recurrence Tracking. In the screening scenario, the clinician would draw the blood biopsy of high-risk (i.e. smoking, family history, etc.) patients in the outpatient setting at their regular checkup. If circulating tumor cells are detected, the patient would then be funneled into the existing workflow of radiology imaging, biopsy, and diagnosis. In the case of recurrence tracking, a clinician would opt to perform a blood biopsy rather than an x-ray or low dose CT scan for the regular review of cancer patients after their treatment has completed. In this way, we would be able to identify a recurrence sooner and fast track treatment as we would already be on high alert as to where to look due to the patient's history. In all likelihood, the patient would still undergo the standard radiology imaging, biopsy, and diagnosis as a precautionary measure. Lastly, it is important to note that clinicians perform biopsies for a variety of ailments from cysts to infertility testing of which the blood biopsy technique would not rule out. The argument that blood biopsy will decrease the number of invasive biopsies performed is valid, but the likelihood that it will replace the procedure altogether is astronomically low.

Lastly, there are imaging techniques that are being developed to classify and diagnose tumors based on tags that are illuminated in an MRI or CT. These techniques are being presented as a way to circumvent the biopsy process and move straight into treatment. The challenge with this argument is that all of our therapeutic decisions are made on the cellular architecture and genomic level which would be lost in this technique. Additionally, you would be removing all profits of the pathology workflow. The pushback from these two factors cannot be overstated as the medical field prefers evolutionary change to revolutionary change to the workflow.

In short, the field of pathology is about to experience a significant evolution on par with what we have already seen take place in the field of radiology. Today, all pathology slides are handled manually in the same way that radiologists used to hold x-rays up to a light. Our current approach to pathology is time consuming and labor intensive which is already over strained with an aging population and steadily declining pathology workforce. With 63% of pathologists planning on retiring in the next decade, and fewer medical students entering the field in the first place, we are about to reach a breaking point without proper support and intervention from computer-based decision support tools. Cytology is the most time, resource, and cost-effective method of diagnosis. As we have seen in other fields, this coming decade will see continued integration of automated tools to improve throughput and outcomes. We at Pathware are positioned to set the stage for the future diagnostic workflow as we work to make point-of-care pathology a reality.

## How is This Product Different?
No company to date has fully automated the rapid on-site evaluation process. Pathware automates the image acquisition and subsequent analysis. Several companies have attempted to alleviate the financial burden that having a pathologist in the biopsy suite incurs and have implemented tele-pathology workflows but have failed to realize that having pathologists involved in such a routine task as ROSE, in any manner, is a financial strain. We have opted for full automation, from slide handling to image analysis, to quality assessment and file management; no one else has. A large part of this is due to the adaptation of NVIDIA’s latest GPU technology, which allows for an immense number of computer vision processes to be run simultaneously, effectively rendering analysis instantaneous. No other company has anywhere near the processing power they harnessed built into our scanning systems.

The Bioptic unit has four main advantages over competitors to consider:

1. The size of the unit will fit on a desktop work area – more manageable than a mobile cart of massive lab unit.
2. The price of the unit (at $20K) is an order of magnitude less than other scanners (some running as high as $1MM).
3. The time needed to process cytological samples is less than 5 minutes – far faster than current industry standards.
4. The Bioptic System does not need stains or contrast agents to create a Whole Slide Image.

<!-- move em -->

## Financial Factors
[Follow-on products or services?](Sales%20and%20Marketing%20798fea689f844dddb24b53382092ca8e/Follow-on%20products%20or%20services%2098ee9204c6aa44b2ac6e827eef11051f.md)

[Reimbursement & Price Modeling](Sales%20and%20Marketing%20798fea689f844dddb24b53382092ca8e/Reimbursement%20&%20Price%20Modeling%20a2b16acf27dc415a81a859402c043bd5.md)